src/asciidoc/appendix-application-properties.adoc, before:

[[appendix-hawaii-application-properties]]
[appendix]
=== Hawaii application properties

Various properties can be specified inside your `application.properties/application.yml` file or as command line switches.
This section provides a list of available Hawaii application properties.

[source%nowrap,properties,indent=0,subs="verbatim,attributes,macros"]
----
	# ===================================================================
	# HAWAII PROPERTIES
	#
	# This sample file is provided as a guideline. Do NOT copy it in its
	# entirety to your own application.               ^^^
	# ===================================================================

	# HAWAII SPRING BOOT DEFAULTS
    spring:
      jackson:
        date-format: com.fasterxml.jackson.databind.util.ISO8601DateFormat
        property-naming-strategy: CAMEL_CASE_TO_LOWER_CASE_WITH_UNDERSCORES
        serialization:
          indent-output: false
          write-dates-as-timestamps: false
          write-date-timestamps-as-nanoseconds: false
    logging:
      level:
        org.hawaiiframework: INFO
        org.springframework: INFO
    hawaii:
      time:
        # Enable creation of the `HawaiiTime` bean.
        enabled: true
        # The timezone to use like `UTC`, `Europe/Amsterdam` or `GMT+1`.
        timezone: UTC
      async:
        # location of the Hawaii async configuration file
        configuration: ./config/async-config.yml
      logging:
        opentracing:
          # Must set explicitly to false if opentracing is not required. If the property is not present, the default is "enabled = true".
          enabled: true
        filters:
          kibana-log-cleanup:
            enabled: true
            order: -900
          request-duration:
            enabled: true
            order: -800
          opentracing-response:
            # Must set explicitly to false if opentracing is not required. If the property is not present, the default is "enabled = true".
            enabled: true
            order: -790
          kibana-log:
            enabled: true
            order: -700
            http-header: X-Hawaii-Frontend-IP-Address
          transaction-type:
            enabled: true
            order: -600
          transaction-id:
            enabled: true
            order: -500
            http-header: X-Hawaii-Tx-Id
          request-id:
            enabled: true
            order: -400
            http-header: X-Hawaii-Request-Id
          request-response:
            enabled: true
            order: -300
            fallback-to-file: true
            directory: /tmp
            max-log-size: 50k
            # For console logging, the allowed content types, empty means allow all.
            allowed-content-types:
            - application/json
            - text/plain
            - text/xml
            - application/vnd.spring-boot.actuator.v1+json
          container-name:
            enabled: true
            http-header: X-Hawaii-Hostname
            hostname: ${HOSTNAME:localhost}
          user-details:
            enabled: true
            order: 110

    ---

    spring:
      profiles: dev
      jackson:
        serialization.indent-output: true
    logging:
      level:
        org.hawaiiframework: DEBUG

----

Commit message:

Use correct application configuration properties for Client IP Log Filter.

src/asciidoc/appendix-application-properties.adoc, after:

[[appendix-hawaii-application-properties]]
[appendix]
=== Hawaii application properties

Various properties can be specified inside your `application.properties/application.yml` file or as command line switches.
This section provides a list of available Hawaii application properties.

[source%nowrap,properties,indent=0,subs="verbatim,attributes,macros"]
----
	# ===================================================================
	# HAWAII PROPERTIES
	#
	# This sample file is provided as a guideline. Do NOT copy it in its
	# entirety to your own application.               ^^^
	# ===================================================================

	# HAWAII SPRING BOOT DEFAULTS
    spring:
      jackson:
        date-format: com.fasterxml.jackson.databind.util.ISO8601DateFormat
        property-naming-strategy: CAMEL_CASE_TO_LOWER_CASE_WITH_UNDERSCORES
        serialization:
          indent-output: false
          write-dates-as-timestamps: false
          write-date-timestamps-as-nanoseconds: false
    logging:
      level:
        org.hawaiiframework: INFO
        org.springframework: INFO
    hawaii:
      time:
        # Enable creation of the `HawaiiTime` bean.
        enabled: true
        # The timezone to use like `UTC`, `Europe/Amsterdam` or `GMT+1`.
        timezone: UTC
      async:
        # location of the Hawaii async configuration file
        configuration: ./config/async-config.yml
      logging:
        opentracing:
          # Must set explicitly to false if opentracing is not required. If the property is not present, the default is "enabled = true".
          enabled: true
        allowed-content-types:
        - application/json
        - text/plain
        - text/xml
        - application/vnd.spring-boot.actuator.v1+json
        - application/vnd.spring-boot.actuator.v3+json
        filters:
          kibana-log-cleanup:
            enabled: true
            order: -900
          request-duration:
            enabled: true
            order: -800
          software-version:
            enabled: true
            order: -792
          container-name:
            enabled: true
            order: -791
            http-header: X-Hawaii-Hostname
            hostname: ${HOSTNAME:localhost}
          oidc:
            # Must set explicitly to false if oidc is not required. If the property is not present, the default is "enabled = true".
            enabled: true
            order: -790
          opentracing-response:
            # Must set explicitly to false if opentracing is not required. If the property is not present, the default is "enabled = true".
            enabled: true
            order: -790
          open-telemetry-response:
            # Must set explicitly to false if open telemetry is not required. If the property is not present, the default is "enabled = true".
            enabled: true
            order: -790
            http-header: ${OPEN_TELEMETRY_TRACE_ID_HEADER:trace-id}
          client-ip-log:
            # Must set explicitly to false if client ip logging is not required. If the property is not present, the default is "enabled = true".
            enabled: true
            order: -700
            http-header: X-Hawaii-Frontend-IP-Address
          transaction-type:
            enabled: true
            order: -600
          transaction-id:
            enabled: true
            order: -500
            http-header: X-Hawaii-Tx-Id
          request-id:
            enabled: true
            order: -400
            http-header: X-Hawaii-Request-Id
          request-response:
            enabled: true
            order: -300

          user-details:
            enabled: true
            order: 110

    ---

    spring:
      profiles: dev
      jackson:
        serialization.indent-output: true
    logging:
      level:
        org.hawaiiframework: DEBUG

----
